YNU-354: Protocol Docs (#69)
layer-3/docs: docs/protocol/on-chain/channel-lifecycle.mdx

:::

## Closure - Challenge-Response

**Purpose**: Handle closure when participants disagree or one party is unresponsive.

### Challenge Process

1. To initiate a challenge, a participant MAY:
   - Call the `challenge` function with their latest valid state and required proofs

2. The contract MUST:
   - Verify the submitted state via the adjudicator
   - If valid, store the state and start the challenge period
   - Set a challenge expiration timestamp (current time + challenge duration)
   - Set the channel status to `DISPUTE`
   - Emit a `Challenged` event with channelId and expiration time

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant User
    participant Contract
    participant Timer
    
    User->>Contract: challenge(channelId, state, proofs)
    Contract->>Contract: Verify state
    Contract->>Contract: Store state
    Contract->>Contract: Set status to DISPUTE
    Contract->>Timer: Start challenge period
    Contract->>User: Emit Challenged event
```

### Response Process

During the challenge period, any participant MAY:

> - Submit a more recent valid state by calling `challenge` again

Reviewer: The more recent state should be submitted with `checkpoint`

Author: Done

```mermaid
graph TB
    A[Challenge Initiated] --> B{Response Received?}
    B -->|Yes - Newer State| C[Update State]
    C --> D[Reset Timer]
    D --> B
    B -->|No - Timer Expires| E[Proceed to Close]
    
    style A fill:#FFB6C1
    style C fill:#87CEEB
    style E fill:#90EE90
```

### Resolution

After the challenge period expires, any participant MAY:
- Call `close` to distribute funds according to the last valid challenged state

The contract MUST:
- Verify the challenge period has elapsed
- Distribute funds according to the challenged state's allocations
- Set channel status to `FINAL`
- Delete the channel metadata
- Emit a `Closed` event

:::warning Key Principle
The challenge mechanism gives parties time to prove they have a newer state. If no one responds with a newer state, the challenged state is assumed correct.
:::

**Complete Challenge-Response Flow**:

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> Active
    Active --> Dispute: challenge()
    Dispute --> Dispute: challenge() with newer state
    Dispute --> Final: close() after timeout
    Final --> [*]
    
    note right of Dispute: Challenge period active<br/>Parties can submit<br/>newer states
```

> ## Reset Protocol (Resize)

Reviewer: This section should be rewritten as it's not how it works)

Author: Apologies. I referred to incorrect markdown. I have corrected and added it.

---
sidebar_position: 3
title: "Channel Lifecycle"
---

import Tooltip from '@site/src/components/Tooltip';

# Channel Lifecycle

## Creation Phase

**Purpose**: Initiate a new <Tooltip content="A secure communication pathway between participants that locks funds in an on-chain smart contract while enabling off-chain state updates.">channel</Tooltip> with specified <Tooltip content="An entity (identified by a wallet address) that is part of a channel.">participants</Tooltip> and initial funding.

**Process**:

> 1. The <Tooltip content="Most often a light client willing to fund a ledger account with the Broker.">Creator</Tooltip> MUST:

Reviewer 2: For me the "MUST" sounds a bit odd. I understand that this is a protocol and can be described with "must", but "The process" header already seems to mean that it is obligatory.

Still, I am not a specialist on docs. @ihsraham , what do you think is the most correct way here?

Author: I think we can drop the word MUST here from both point 1 & 2
The numbered steps, they already imply sequence + obligation

Author: [f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b)

   - Construct a Channel configuration with <Tooltip content="An entity (identified by a wallet address) that is part of a channel.">participants</Tooltip>, <Tooltip content="A smart contract that validates state transitions according to application-specific rules.">adjudicator</Tooltip>, challenge period, and nonce

>    - Prepare an initial <Tooltip content="A snapshot of the channel at a point in time, including fund allocations and application-specific data.">State</Tooltip> where `state.data` contains the magic number `CHANOPEN` (7877)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - Prepare an initial <Tooltip content="A snapshot of the channel at a point in time, including fund allocations and application-specific data.">State</Tooltip> with application-specific app data.
   - Specify the `state.intent` as `INITIALIZE`.
```

Author: [f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b)

   - Define expected token deposits for all participants in `state.allocations`

>    - Compute the funding <Tooltip content="A cryptographic hash of a channel state, used for signature verification.">stateHash</Tooltip> of this initial state

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - Sign the computed <Tooltip content="A specific encoding of a State, used for signing and signature verification.">packedState</Tooltip> of this initial state
```

Author: [f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b)

   - Include Creator's signature in `state.sigs` at position 0

>    - Call the `create` function with the channel configuration and initial signed state

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - Call either `create(...)` or `depositAndCreate(...)` function with the channel configuration and initial signed state
```

Author: [f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b)

> 

Reviewer 2: I think it is better to specify an optional "implicit join" mechanism right here as a "callout", and not below in the "Joining phase" section. This is for when a Creator obtains the second participant signature over the initial state, and supplies it alongside their one. If the second participant has enough funds to be deposited into the channel, it will transition to "Active" status.

Author: [f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b)

2. The contract MUST:
   - Verify the Creator's signature on the funding stateHash
   - Verify Creator has sufficient balance to fund their allocation
   - Lock the Creator's funds according to the allocation
   - Set the channel status to `INITIAL`
   - Emit a `Created` event with channelId, channel configuration, and expected deposits

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant Creator
    participant Contract
    
    Creator->>Creator: Construct Channel config
    Creator->>Creator: Create initial State (CHANOPEN)
    Creator->>Creator: Sign stateHash
    Creator->>Contract: create(channel, state)
    Contract->>Contract: Verify signature
    Contract->>Contract: Lock Creator funds
    Contract->>Contract: Set status to INITIAL
    Contract->>Creator: Emit Created event
```

:::info Important

> The caller (EOA or contract) is usually different from the <Tooltip content="An entity (identified by a wallet address) that is part of a channel.">participant</Tooltip> address. Participants are derived addresses generated by the owner, similar to <Tooltip content="A temporary cryptographic key delegated by a user's main wallet that provides a flexible way for the user to manage security of their funds by giving specific permissions and allowances for specific apps.">session keys</Tooltip>, to enable high-frequency state signing without exposing the main wallet.

Reviewer 2: As was specified previously,

```suggestion
:::info Participant versus Caller address
The first <Tooltip content="An entity (identified by a wallet address) that is part of a channel.">participant</Tooltip> address  is usually different from the caller (EOA or contract), thus enabling channel operation delegation. This can be fruitful as users can fund channels for other ones.
```

Author: [f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b)

:::

## Joining Phase

:::info Two Channel Opening Flows
There are two ways to open a channel:
1. **Modern/Recommended**: Provide ALL signatures in `create()` → channel immediately ACTIVE (see [Architecture](../architecture#channel-opening))
2. **Legacy/Manual**: Provide only creator's signature in `create()` → status INITIAL → separate `join()` calls → ACTIVE

This section documents flow #2. Most implementations use flow #1.
:::

**Purpose**: Allow other participants to join and fund the channel (when using separate join flow).

> **Process**:

Reviewer 2: Suggested changes here and in the diagram:
- remove "Must"
- replace "stateHash" with "packedState"
- replace "Broker" in diagram with "participant"

Author: [f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b)

   - Verify the <Tooltip content="A unique identifier for a channel, computed as the hash of the channel configuration.">channelId</Tooltip> and expected allocations
   - Sign the same funding <Tooltip content="A cryptographic hash of a channel state, used for signature verification.">stateHash</Tooltip> (containing magic number `CHANOPEN`)
   - Call the `join` function with channelId, their participant index, and signature

2. The contract MUST:
   - Verify the participant's signature against the funding stateHash
   - Confirm the signer matches the expected participant at the given index
   - Lock the participant's funds according to the allocation
   - Track the actual deposit in the channel metadata
   - Emit a `Joined` event with channelId and participant index

3. When all participants have joined, the contract MUST:
   - Verify that all expected deposits are fulfilled
   - Set the channel status to `ACTIVE`
   - Emit an `Opened` event with channelId

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant Broker
    participant Contract
    participant System
    

>     Note over Contract: Status = INITIAL

Reviewer 2: Is it possible to add the "Status" to all diagrams at all places when it is changed? I.e. at the end of "Join" flow it is "ACTIVE", at the end of "Creation" flow it is either "INITIAL" or "ACTIVE" etc.

Author: [f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b)

        Contract->>System: Emit Opened event
    end
```

:::success Channel Activation
The channel becomes operational only when ALL participants have successfully joined and funded their allocations.
:::

## Active Phase

**Purpose**: Enable off-chain <Tooltip content="A snapshot of the channel at a point in time, including fund allocations and application-specific data.">state</Tooltip> updates while <Tooltip content="A secure communication pathway between participants that locks funds in an on-chain smart contract while enabling off-chain state updates.">channel</Tooltip> is operational.

### Off-Chain Updates

<Tooltip content="An entity (identified by an address) that is part of a channel.">Participants</Tooltip> MUST:
- Exchange and sign state updates off-chain via the <Tooltip content="The off-chain communication protocol.">Nitro RPC</Tooltip> protocol
- Maintain a record of the latest valid state
- Follow <Tooltip content="A smart contract that validates state transitions according to application-specific rules.">adjudicator</Tooltip>-specific rules for signature requirements
- Use application-specific data in the `state.data` field

Each new state MUST:

> - Contain updated allocations reflecting the new distribution of assets

Reviewer 2: In fact, on-chain protocol does not require allocations to change between different states. I think, it is possible for an application to have two successive states with different data, but same allocations, i.e. in chess when you move a figure, you may not receive or lose your bid / funds yet, unless it is a final move.

Author: [f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b)

- Be signed by the necessary participants according to application rules
- Comply with the validation rules of the channel's adjudicator

The on-chain contract remains unchanged during the active phase unless participants choose to checkpoint a state.

:::tip Off-Chain Efficiency
During the active phase, state updates occur entirely off-chain with zero gas costs and sub-second latency.
:::

## Checkpointing

**Purpose**: Record a state on-chain without entering dispute mode.

**Process**:

1. Any participant MAY:
   - Call the `checkpoint` function with a valid state and required proofs

2. The contract MUST:
   - Verify the submitted state via the adjudicator

>    - If valid and more recent than any previously checkpointed state, store it

Reviewer 2: Only the last checkpointed state is compared.

```suggestion
   - If valid and more recent than the previously checkpointed state, store it
```

Author: [f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b)

   - Emit a `Checkpointed` event with channelId

**Benefits**:
- Creates an on-chain record of current state
- Shortens the effective history that could be challenged
- Does not start a challenge period

> - Channel remains in `ACTIVE` status

Reviewer 2: I would not say that these are benefits, but rather just characteristics. I think it is better to omit them.

Author: [f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b)

```mermaid
graph LR
    A[Active Channel] -->|checkpoint| B[Verify State]
    B -->|Valid| C[Store State]
    C --> D[Emit Event]
    D --> E[Remain Active]
    
    style A fill:#90EE90
    style E fill:#90EE90
```

:::note Optional Operation
Checkpointing is optional but recommended for long-lived channels or after significant value transfers.
:::

## Closure - Cooperative

> **Purpose**: Close <Tooltip content="A secure communication pathway between participants that locks funds in an on-chain smart contract while enabling off-chain state updates.">channel</Tooltip> when all <Tooltip content="An entity (identified by a wallet address) that is part of a channel.">participants</Tooltip> agree on final <Tooltip content="A snapshot of the channel at a point in time, including fund allocations and application-specific data.">state</Tooltip>.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Purpose**: Close <Tooltip content="A secure communication pathway between participants that locks funds in an on-chain smart contract while enabling off-chain state updates.">channel</Tooltip> to distribute locked funds, after all <Tooltip content="An entity (identified by a wallet address) that is part of a channel.">participants</Tooltip> have agreed on the final <Tooltip content="A snapshot of the channel at a point in time, including fund allocations and application-specific data.">state</Tooltip>.
```

Author: [f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b)

**Process**:

1. Any participant MAY:

>    - Prepare a final State where `state.data` contains magic number `CHANCLOSE` (7879)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - Prepare a final State with `intent` equal to `FINALIZE`.
```

Author: [f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b)

   - Collect signatures from all participants on this final state
   - Call the `close` function with <Tooltip content="A unique identifier for a channel, computed as the hash of the channel configuration.">channelId</Tooltip>, final state, and any required proofs

2. The contract MUST:
   - Verify all participant signatures on the closing <Tooltip content="A cryptographic hash of a channel state, used for signature verification.">stateHash</Tooltip>

>    - Verify the state contains the `CHANCLOSE` magic number

Reviewer 2: Update here and in the diagram below:

```suggestion
   - Verify all participant signatures on the closing <Tooltip content="A specific encoding of a State, used for signing and signature verification.">packedState</Tooltip>
   - Verify the state contains the `CHANCLOSE` magic number
```

Author: [f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b)

   - Distribute funds according to the final state's allocations
   - Set the channel status to `FINAL`
   - Delete the channel metadata
   - Emit a `Closed` event

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant User
    participant Contract
    
    User->>User: Create final State (CHANCLOSE)
    User->>User: Collect all signatures
    User->>Contract: close(channelId, state, proofs)
    Contract->>Contract: Verify all signatures
    Contract->>Contract: Verify CHANCLOSE magic
    Contract->>Contract: Distribute funds
    Contract->>Contract: Set status to FINAL
    Contract->>Contract: Delete metadata
    Contract->>User: Emit Closed event
```

:::success Preferred Method
**This is the preferred closure method as it is fast and gas-efficient.** It requires only one transaction and completes immediately without a challenge period.
:::

## Closure - Challenge-Response

**Purpose**: Handle closure when participants disagree or one party is unresponsive.

### Challenge Process

1. To initiate a challenge, a participant MAY:

>    - Call the `challenge` function with their latest valid state and required proofs

Reviewer 2: You can add a "NOTE" here stating that latest state may only exist off-chain and not known on-chain.

Author: [f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b)

2. The contract MUST:
   - Verify the submitted state via the adjudicator
   - If valid, store the state and start the challenge period
   - Set a challenge expiration timestamp (current time + challenge duration)
   - Set the channel status to `DISPUTE`
   - Emit a `Challenged` event with channelId and expiration time

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant User
    participant Contract
    participant Timer
    
    User->>Contract: challenge(channelId, state, proofs)
    Contract->>Contract: Verify state
    Contract->>Contract: Store state
    Contract->>Contract: Set status to DISPUTE
    Contract->>Timer: Start challenge period
    Contract->>User: Emit Challenged event
```

> ### Response Process

Reviewer 2: We are used to call the checkpointing process when there is a challenge as "resolve a challenge with a state / checkpoint". What do you think about renaming this part accordingly, and the next (your "resolution") as "Challenge period elapse"?

Author: Yes, that makes more sense
[f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b)

During the challenge period, any participant MAY:
- Submit a more recent valid state by calling `checkpoint()`
- If the new state is valid and more recent (as determined by the adjudicator or IComparable interface), the contract MUST update the stored state and reset the challenge period

```mermaid
graph TB
    A[Challenge Initiated] --> B{Response Received?}
    B -->|Yes - Newer State| C[Update State]
    C --> D[Reset Timer]
    D --> B
    B -->|No - Timer Expires| E[Proceed to Close]
    
    style A fill:#FFB6C1
    style C fill:#87CEEB
    style E fill:#90EE90
```

### Resolution

After the challenge period expires, any participant MAY:

> - Call `close` to distribute funds according to the last valid challenged state

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Call `close` with an empty candidate and proof to distribute funds according to the last valid challenged state
```

Author: [f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b)

The contract MUST:
- Verify the challenge period has elapsed
- Distribute funds according to the challenged state's allocations
- Set channel status to `FINAL`
- Delete the channel metadata
- Emit a `Closed` event

:::warning Key Principle
The challenge mechanism gives parties time to prove they have a newer state. If no one responds with a newer state, the challenged state is assumed correct.
:::

**Complete Challenge-Response Flow**:

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> Active
    Active --> Dispute: challenge()

>     Dispute --> Dispute: challenge() with newer state

Reviewer 2: As a matter of fact, this is not possible. After a channel has been challenged, it can either recover back to `ACTIVE` via `checkpoint(...)` or be "FINAL" via `close(...)` after a challenge time elapsed.

I think what you wanted to specify here was "Dispute --> Active: checkpoint() with newer state"

Author: [f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b)

    Dispute --> Final: close() after timeout
    Final --> [*]
    
    note right of Dispute: Challenge period active<br/>Parties can submit<br/>newer states
```

## Resize Protocol

> **Purpose**: Adjust <Tooltip content="A secure communication pathway between participants that locks funds in an on-chain smart contract while enabling off-chain state updates.">channel</Tooltip> capacity by locking or unlocking funds **without closing the channel**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Purpose**: Adjust the amount of funds locked in a  <Tooltip content="A secure communication pathway between participants that locks funds in an on-chain smart contract while enabling off-chain state updates.">channel</Tooltip> **without closing the channel**.
```

Author: [f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b)

**Process**:

1. Any <Tooltip content="An entity (identified by a wallet address) that is part of a channel.">participant</Tooltip> MAY:
   - Call the `resize` function with:
     - The <Tooltip content="A unique identifier for a channel, computed as the hash of the channel configuration.">channelId</Tooltip> (remains unchanged)
     - A candidate <Tooltip content="A snapshot of the channel at a point in time, including fund allocations and application-specific data.">State</Tooltip> with:
       - `intent` = `StateIntent.RESIZE` (2)
       - `version` = precedingState.version + 1
       - `data` = ABI-encoded `int256[]` containing delta amounts (positive for deposit, negative for withdrawal)
       - `allocations` = final Allocation[] after resize (absolute amounts)
       - Signatures from **ALL participants** (consensus required)

>      - An array of proof States supporting the candidate

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     - The <Tooltip content="A unique identifier for a channel, computed as the hash of the channel configuration.">channelId</Tooltip> (remains unchanged)
     - A candidate <Tooltip content="A snapshot of the channel at a point in time, including fund allocations and application-specific data.">State</Tooltip> with:
       - `intent` = `StateIntent.RESIZE`
       - `version` = precedingState.version + 1
       - `data` = ABI-encoded `int256[]` containing delta amounts (positive for deposit, negative for withdrawal) respectively for participants
       - `allocations` = Allocation[] after resize (absolute amounts)
       - Signatures from **ALL participants** (consensus required)
     - An array of proof states containing the previous state (`version-1`) first and its proof later in the array
```

Reviewer 2: Also the participant depositing must contain at least the corresponding amount in the "Custody locked" or "Custody ledger" account.

Author: [f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b)

2. The contract MUST:
   - Verify the <Tooltip content="A secure communication pathway between participants that locks funds in an on-chain smart contract while enabling off-chain state updates.">channel</Tooltip> is in ACTIVE status
   - Verify all participants have signed the resize state
   - Decode delta amounts from `candidate.data`
   - Validate adjudicator approves the preceding state
   - For positive deltas: Lock additional funds from custody account
   - For negative deltas: Unlock funds back to custody account
   - Update expected deposits to match new allocations
   - Emit `Resized(channelId, deltaAllocations)` event

3. The <Tooltip content="A secure communication pathway between participants that locks funds in an on-chain smart contract while enabling off-chain state updates.">channel</Tooltip>:
   - **channelId remains UNCHANGED** (same channel persists)
   - Status remains **ACTIVE** throughout
   - Version increments by 1
   - No new channel is created

> 

Reviewer 2: I am not sure if such explicitness is needed, but if you want, you can add a note about "Implicit transfer", that it is possible to combine a transfer (change of allocations among participants) with a resize operation. E.g., in previous state participants had `[5, 10]` as allocations. They want to perform a transfer of 2 tokens from second to first participant, so that allocations are `[7, 8]`, and also first participant wants to withdraw all 7 and the second wants to top-up by 6. This way the deltas must be `[ -7, 6]`, while the `resize` state allocations must be `[0, 14]`. The rule of thumb is that `sum_allocations_resize_state = sum_allocations_prev_state + sum_delta_amounts` (for the example it is `14 = 15 + (-1)`.

Author: I added a note about this: [f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b)

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant User
    participant Contract
    
    User->>Contract: resize(channelId, resizeState, proofs)
    Note right of Contract: Same channelId<br/>State version + 1<br/>Intent = RESIZE
    Contract->>Contract: Verify signatures (all participants)
    Contract->>Contract: Decode delta amounts from state.data
    Contract->>Contract: Lock funds (positive deltas)
    Contract->>Contract: Unlock funds (negative deltas)
    Contract->>Contract: Update expected deposits
    Contract->>User: Resized(channelId, deltas)
    Note right of User: Same channelId<br/>Channel still ACTIVE
```

**Use Cases**:
- Increasing channel capacity (positive delta: adding funds)
- Decreasing channel capacity (negative delta: removing funds)
- Adjusting allocations while maintaining channel continuity

:::tip In-Place Update
The resize operation updates the channel **in place**. The channelId stays the same, and the channel remains ACTIVE throughout. This differs from closing and reopening, which would create a new channel.
:::
## State Transition Summary

The complete channel lifecycle state machine:

> ```mermaid

Reviewer 2: You should also update the diagram and the "valid transitions" table with:
- an arrow from "void" to "active" with "create(...) with signatures from all participants"
- resize(...) with arrow from "active" to "active"

Author: [f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b)

stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> VOID: Initial
    VOID --> INITIAL: create()
    INITIAL --> ACTIVE: join() all
    ACTIVE --> ACTIVE: checkpoint()
    ACTIVE --> DISPUTE: challenge()
    ACTIVE --> FINAL: close() cooperative
    DISPUTE --> ACTIVE: checkpoint() newer
    DISPUTE --> FINAL: close() after timeout
    FINAL --> [*]: Deleted
    
    note right of VOID: Channel does not exist
    note right of INITIAL: Awaiting participants
    note right of ACTIVE: Operational<br/>Off-chain updates
    note right of DISPUTE: Challenge active<br/>Response period
    note right of FINAL: Funds distributed<br/>Ready for deletion
```

**Valid Transitions**:

| From | To | Trigger | Requirements |
|------|----|---------|--------------| 

> | VOID | INITIAL | `create()` | Creator signature, sufficient balance |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| VOID | INITIAL | `create()` | Creator signature, sufficient balance, INITIALIZE intent |
```

Author: [fc05ed64438a9627748ad466261795d9e49e55c6](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/fc05ed64438a9627748ad466261795d9e49e55c6)

| INITIAL | ACTIVE | `join()` | All participants joined and funded |
| ACTIVE | ACTIVE | `checkpoint()` | Valid newer state |
| ACTIVE | DISPUTE | `challenge()` | Valid state with proofs |

> | ACTIVE | FINAL | `close()` | All signatures, CHANCLOSE magic |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| ACTIVE | DISPUTE | `challenge()` | Valid state newer then latest known on-chain |
| ACTIVE | FINAL | `close()` | All signatures, FINALIZE intent |
```

Author: [f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/f889dd9d34e1744c4d0d2598c3c590f87acb676b)

---

import Tooltip from '@site/src/components/Tooltip';
import { tooltipDefinitions } from '@site/src/constants/tooltipDefinitions';

# Channel Lifecycle

## State Transitions Overview

The lifecycle of a <Tooltip content={tooltipDefinitions.channel}>channel</Tooltip> moves through well-defined states depending on how participants interact with the custody contract.

> ```mermaid
> stateDiagram-v2
>     [*] --> VOID
>     VOID --> INITIAL: create()
>     INITIAL --> ACTIVE: join() (all participants)
>     ACTIVE --> DISPUTE: challenge()

Reviewer 2: Let's add the simplified creation flow, checkpoint and resize here as well:
  
```suggestion
    VOID --> INITIAL: create()
    VOID --> ACTIVE: create() (sigs from all participants)
    INITIAL --> ACTIVE: join() (all participants)
    ACTIVE --> ACTIVE: resize()
    ACTIVE --> ACTIVE: checkpoint()
    ACTIVE --> DISPUTE: challenge()
```

Author: [aad0b80ca8e5c74d4c329a9ed21b7db470b0d336](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/aad0b80ca8e5c74d4c329a9ed21b7db470b0d336)

    style E fill:#90EE90

> ```

Reviewer 2: This diagram does not represent the process correctly: the newer state can not be challenged with. I think we can safely remove the diagram as the concept is simple, the "challenge period elapse" section does not have a diagram either, and it is all explained in the "Complete Challenge-Response Flow:" diagram.

Author: [aad0b80ca8e5c74d4c329a9ed21b7db470b0d336](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/aad0b80ca8e5c74d4c329a9ed21b7db470b0d336)

    participant User
    participant Contract
    
    Note over Contract: Status = ACTIVE
    User->>Contract: resize(channelId, resizeState, proofs)
    Note right of Contract: Same channelId<br/>State version + 1<br/>Intent = RESIZE
    Contract->>Contract: Verify signatures (all participants)
    Contract->>Contract: Decode delta amounts from state.data
    Contract->>Contract: Lock funds (positive deltas)
    Contract->>Contract: Unlock funds (negative deltas)
    Contract->>Contract: Update expected deposits
    Note over Contract: Status = ACTIVE
    Contract->>User: Resized(channelId, deltas)
    Note right of User: Same channelId<br/>Channel still ACTIVE
```

**Use Cases**:
- Increasing allocations (positive delta: adding funds)

> - Decreasing allocations (negative delta: removing funds)

Reviewer 2: Here and in the definition of the Resize operation I would specify explicitly "increase / decrease funds locked in the channel" instead of allocations.

Author: [aad0b80ca8e5c74d4c329a9ed21b7db470b0d336](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/aad0b80ca8e5c74d4c329a9ed21b7db470b0d336)
